plan.md, before:

# Desktop pet cat app

## Technology Stack Recommendation

For a Windows desktop pet app with these features, I'd recommend:

-   **Framework**: WPF (Windows Presentation Foundation) with C#/.NET (.NET 9.0)
-   **Why WPF**: Native Windows support, excellent transparency/layering capabilities, smooth animations, and the ability to create always-on-top borderless windows
-   **Alternative**: Electron with web technologies if you want cross-platform potential

## Architecture Plan

### 1. Core Components

**Main Window Manager**

-   Borderless, transparent window that spans the entire screen
-   Always-on-top functionality with click-through for non-interactive areas
-   Manages both the pet and house UI elements

**Pet Entity System**

-   State machine for pet behaviors (idle, walking, playing, sleeping, etc.)
-   Needs system (hunger, cleanliness, happiness)
-   Position and movement controller
-   Animation controller

**House UI Component**

-   Dockable panel in bottom-right corner
-   Can minimize/expand
-   Contains needs meters and interaction buttons

### 2. Key Technical Implementation

**Window Setup (WPF)**

```csharp
// Transparent, always-on-top window
WindowStyle = WindowStyle.None
AllowsTransparency = true
Background = Transparent
Topmost = true
ShowInTaskbar = false
```

**Hit Testing**

-   Make most of the window click-through except pet and house
-   Use Win32 API calls for proper click-through behavior
-   Pet remains interactive for dragging

### 3. Feature Implementation Plan

**Phase 1: Foundation ✅ COMPLETE**

**Technical Implementation:**

-   Window: Borderless, maximized, transparent with WS_EX_LAYERED flag
-   Hit-testing: Win32 WndProc hook for selective click-through
-   Canvas: No background to allow click-through while keeping pet interactive
-   Sprite: Single-frame Idle1.png loaded from Resources/Sprites/
-   Animation: Smooth slide-in/slide-out for house panel (300ms with cubic easing)

**Known Limitations:**

-   Needs don't degrade over time (Phase 2)
-   No mouse chasing behavior (Phase 3)
-   No persistence between sessions (Phase 2)

**Sprite Decision:**

-   Using existing PNGs as-is (each PNG contains multiple animation frames)
-   Phase 2 will implement frame extraction for animations

**Phase 2: Pet Behavior (Week 2-3)**

**Sprite Information:**

-   Sprite strips located at: Resources/Sprites/RetroCatsPaid/Cats/Sprites/
-   Each PNG contains horizontal sprite strip with multiple frames
-   Frame size: 64x64 pixels
-   Frame count calculated automatically (width / 64)
-   Available animations: Idle, Running, Sleeping, Excited, Happy, Jump, Dance, etc.

**Phase 2 Status: ✅ COMPLETE**
All core pet behavior features implemented and tested successfully:

-   Pet wanders randomly in 2D space with smooth animations
-   Proper state management (Idle ↔ Walking transitions)
-   Sprite flipping based on movement direction
-   Edge detection and bouncing with proper physics
-   Needs degradation system working
-   Comprehensive logging for debugging
-   No known bugs

**TODO (Future Enhancements):**

-   ⏳ Fine-tune animation speeds if needed
-   ⏳ Adjust wandering behavior parameters (speed, intervals, etc.)
-   ⏳ Add more animation states (Sleeping, Playing, Eating)
-   ⏳ Tune needs degration

**Phase 3: Interactions (Week 3-4) - ⚠️ IN PROGRESS**

**Implemented Features:**

-   ✅ Click interactions (petting increases happiness)
-   ✅ Drag-to-house functionality (opens house panel)
-   ✅ Action button animations (Feed → Eating, Clean → Playing, Play → Playing)
-   ✅ Petting cooldown (2 seconds)
-   ✅ Action animation duration (3 seconds)

**Work Session (2025-11-17) - Mouse Chasing & Attack System Implemented:**

Successfully implemented complete mouse chasing and attack behavior with clean architecture:

**Implemented Features:**

1. ✅ Mouse position tracking using Win32 API (GetCursorPos)
2. ✅ Proximity detection (200px radius)
3. ✅ Chase trigger system:
    - 2-second proximity timer before triggering
    - 42% chance to start chasing (adds personality!)
    - Logs when cat ignores the mouse
4. ✅ Chase behavior:
    - Duration: Random 10-15 seconds
    - Speed: Dynamic based on distance to mouse
        - Base speed (≤700px): 150 px/s
        - Medium speed (700-1200px): 200 px/s
        - Far speed (>1200px): 250 px/s
    - Continues for full duration regardless of mouse distance
    - Uses Running.png animation
5. ✅ Attack behavior:
    - Triggers when distance < 69px during chase
    - Plays Attack.png animation for 2 seconds
    - Can attack multiple times during single chase
    - Resumes chasing after each attack
6. ✅ New PetState enums: `Chasing` and `Attacking`
7. ✅ Clean state management and logging

**Technical Implementation:**

-   Mouse tracking: `MainWindow.xaml.cs:272-291` (UpdateMousePosition)
-   Chase trigger: `MainWindow.xaml.cs:567-603` (proximity timer + random chance)
-   Chase movement: `MainWindow.xaml.cs:638-720` (chase & attack logic)
-   State definitions: `Animation/PetState.cs:10-11`
-   Animation mapping: `Animation/AnimationController.cs:89-90`

**Behavior Flow:**

```
Mouse within 300px for 2s → 42% chance → Chase starts (10-15s) →
Distance < 69px → Attack (2s) → Resume chase → Repeat until duration ends → Idle
```

**TODO (Future Sessions):**

1. ⏳ Fine-tune chase/attack parameters if needed
2. ⏳ Add sound effects for chase and attack
3. ⏳ Consider adding visual effects (dust clouds, etc.)

**Phase 4: Pet's house (Week 4-5)**

-   When clicked on the cat's house the room of the cat should show up
-   it should be possible to drag and drop the cat into the room to make the cat stay there
-   room should be lockable (if locked cat can't get out, if unlock cat can randomly get out)
-   animate cat chilling in the room
-   build different rooms

**Phase 5: Reminders & Polish (Week 6-7)**

-   Notification system for reminders
-   System tray integration
-   Settings menu for customization
-   Sound effects and purring

### 4. Data Structure Design

```csharp
class Pet {
    // Position & Movement
    Point Position
    Vector2 Velocity

    // Needs (0-100)
    float Hunger
    float Cleanliness
    float Happiness

    // State
    PetState CurrentState
    AnimationFrame CurrentAnimation

    // Behaviors
    bool IsChasingMouse
    bool IsBeingDragged
    bool IsInHouse
}

class Reminder {
    string Message
    TimeSpan Interval
    DateTime LastTriggered
    bool IsEnabled
}
```

### 5. Animation System

**Sprite Management**

-   Use sprite sheets for smooth animations
-   Each animation state has multiple frames
-   Implement smooth transitions between states

**Animation States**

-   Idle (sitting, standing variations)
-   Walking (left/right directions)
-   Running (chasing mouse)
-   Sleeping (z's animation)
-   Playing (batting at toys)
-   Happy/Sad expressions

### 6. Special Considerations

**Performance**

-   Use hardware acceleration for rendering
-   Implement efficient collision detection for mouse interaction
-   Throttle animation updates to 30-60 FPS

**User Experience**

-   Include "Do Not Disturb" mode
-   Save pet state between sessions (most likely needs a DB)

**Mouse Chasing Behavior**

-   Calculate distance to cursor
-   Randomly trigger chase mode when cursor is within range
-   Use easing functions for smooth pursuit
-   Add playful "pounce" animation when close

### 7. Development Tools Needed

-   **Visual Studio** for C#/WPF development
-   **Graphics software** for sprite creation (or use free sprite packs)
-   **Git** for version control
-   **WiX Toolset** or similar for creating installer

### 8. File Structure

```
CatDesktopPet/
├── Core/
│   ├── PetController.cs
│   ├── NeedsSystem.cs
│   └── StateManager.cs
├── UI/
│   ├── MainWindow.xaml
│   ├── HousePanel.xaml
│   └── SettingsWindow.xaml
├── Animation/
│   ├── AnimationController.cs
│   └── SpriteManager.cs
├── Data/
│   ├── SaveManager.cs
│   └── ReminderSystem.cs
└── Resources/
    ├── Sprites/
    └── Sounds/
```

Commit message:

New room and needs indicators

plan.md, after:

# Desktop pet cat app

## Technology Stack Recommendation

For a Windows desktop pet app with these features, I'd recommend:

-   **Framework**: WPF (Windows Presentation Foundation) with C#/.NET (.NET 9.0)
-   **Why WPF**: Native Windows support, excellent transparency/layering capabilities, smooth animations, and the ability to create always-on-top borderless windows
-   **Alternative**: Electron with web technologies if you want cross-platform potential

## Architecture Plan

### 1. Core Components

**Main Window Manager**

-   Borderless, transparent window that spans the entire screen
-   Always-on-top functionality with click-through for non-interactive areas
-   Manages both the pet and house UI elements

**Pet Entity System**

-   State machine for pet behaviors (idle, walking, playing, sleeping, etc.)
-   Needs system (hunger, cleanliness, happiness)
-   Position and movement controller
-   Animation controller

**House UI Component**

-   Dockable panel in bottom-right corner
-   Can minimize/expand
-   Contains needs meters and interaction buttons

### 2. Key Technical Implementation

**Window Setup (WPF)**

```csharp
// Transparent, always-on-top window
WindowStyle = WindowStyle.None
AllowsTransparency = true
Background = Transparent
Topmost = true
ShowInTaskbar = false
```

**Hit Testing**

-   Make most of the window click-through except pet and house
-   Use Win32 API calls for proper click-through behavior
-   Pet remains interactive for dragging

### 3. Feature Implementation Plan

**Phase 1: Foundation ✅ COMPLETE**

**Technical Implementation:**

-   Window: Borderless, maximized, transparent with WS_EX_LAYERED flag
-   Hit-testing: Win32 WndProc hook for selective click-through
-   Canvas: No background to allow click-through while keeping pet interactive
-   Sprite: Single-frame Idle1.png loaded from Resources/Sprites/
-   Animation: Smooth slide-in/slide-out for house panel (300ms with cubic easing)

**Known Limitations:**

-   Needs don't degrade over time (Phase 2)
-   No mouse chasing behavior (Phase 3)
-   No persistence between sessions (Phase 2)

**Sprite Decision:**

-   Using existing PNGs as-is (each PNG contains multiple animation frames)
-   Phase 2 will implement frame extraction for animations

**Phase 2: Pet Behavior (Week 2-3)**

**Sprite Information:**

-   Sprite strips located at: Resources/Sprites/RetroCatsPaid/Cats/Sprites/
-   Each PNG contains horizontal sprite strip with multiple frames
-   Frame size: 64x64 pixels
-   Frame count calculated automatically (width / 64)
-   Available animations: Idle, Running, Sleeping, Excited, Happy, Jump, Dance, etc.

**Phase 2 Status: ✅ COMPLETE**
All core pet behavior features implemented and tested successfully:

-   Pet wanders randomly in 2D space with smooth animations
-   Proper state management (Idle ↔ Walking transitions)
-   Sprite flipping based on movement direction
-   Edge detection and bouncing with proper physics
-   Needs degradation system working
-   Comprehensive logging for debugging
-   No known bugs

**TODO (Future Enhancements):**

-   ⏳ Fine-tune animation speeds if needed
-   ⏳ Adjust wandering behavior parameters (speed, intervals, etc.)
-   ⏳ Add more animation states (Sleeping, Playing, Eating)
-   ⏳ Tune needs degration

**Phase 3: Interactions (Week 3-4) - ⚠️ IN PROGRESS**

**Implemented Features:**

-   ✅ Click interactions (petting increases happiness)
-   ✅ Drag-to-house functionality (opens house panel)
-   ✅ Action button animations (Feed → Eating, Clean → Playing, Play → Playing)
-   ✅ Petting cooldown (2 seconds)
-   ✅ Action animation duration (3 seconds)

**Work Session (2025-11-17) - Mouse Chasing & Attack System Implemented:**

Successfully implemented complete mouse chasing and attack behavior with clean architecture:

**Implemented Features:**

1. ✅ Mouse position tracking using Win32 API (GetCursorPos)
2. ✅ Proximity detection (200px radius)
3. ✅ Chase trigger system:
    - 2-second proximity timer before triggering
    - 42% chance to start chasing (adds personality!)
    - Logs when cat ignores the mouse
4. ✅ Chase behavior:
    - Duration: Random 10-15 seconds
    - Speed: Dynamic based on distance to mouse
        - Base speed (≤700px): 150 px/s
        - Medium speed (700-1200px): 200 px/s
        - Far speed (>1200px): 250 px/s
    - Continues for full duration regardless of mouse distance
    - Uses Running.png animation
5. ✅ Attack behavior:
    - Triggers when distance < 69px during chase
    - Plays Attack.png animation for 2 seconds
    - Can attack multiple times during single chase
    - Resumes chasing after each attack
6. ✅ New PetState enums: `Chasing` and `Attacking`
7. ✅ Clean state management and logging

**Technical Implementation:**

-   Mouse tracking: `MainWindow.xaml.cs:272-291` (UpdateMousePosition)
-   Chase trigger: `MainWindow.xaml.cs:567-603` (proximity timer + random chance)
-   Chase movement: `MainWindow.xaml.cs:638-720` (chase & attack logic)
-   State definitions: `Animation/PetState.cs:10-11`
-   Animation mapping: `Animation/AnimationController.cs:89-90`

**Behavior Flow:**

```
Mouse within 300px for 2s → 42% chance → Chase starts (10-15s) →
Distance < 69px → Attack (2s) → Resume chase → Repeat until duration ends → Idle
```

**TODO (Future Sessions):**

1. ⏳ Fine-tune chase/attack parameters if needed
2. ⏳ Add sound effects for chase and attack
3. ⏳ Consider adding visual effects (dust clouds, etc.)

**Phase 4: Pet's house (Week 4-5)**

-   When clicked on the cat's house the room of the cat should show up
-   it should be possible to drag and drop the cat into the room to make the cat stay there
-   room should be lockable (if locked cat can't get out, if unlock cat can randomly get out)
-   animate cat chilling in the room
-   build different rooms

**Technical Implementation:**

In the path: `Resources\Sprites\RetroCatsPaid\CatItems`:

-   under `Rooms` there are .png files, which contain empty rooms, this is going to be the base for the cat house (background), all other items will be added to this room (on top)
-   under `Decorations` There are different items, which will have to be placed in the room
    -   The items are grouped (several of the same items in different color in one png) and they are named in the followin pattern: `{itemname}-axb.png`, where a is the number of columns and b is the number of rows of items in this png. Files starting with `template` should not be used.
    -   We are going to go voer each item one by one, figuring out it's placement in the room, later the user will be able to customise the item by changing it's color, but the position in the room will stay fixed.

**Phase 5: Reminders & Polish (Week 6-7)**

-   Notification system for reminders
-   System tray integration
-   Settings menu for customization
-   Sound effects and purring

### 4. Data Structure Design

```csharp
class Pet {
    // Position & Movement
    Point Position
    Vector2 Velocity

    // Needs (0-100)
    float Hunger
    float Cleanliness
    float Happiness

    // State
    PetState CurrentState
    AnimationFrame CurrentAnimation

    // Behaviors
    bool IsChasingMouse
    bool IsBeingDragged
    bool IsInHouse
}

class Reminder {
    string Message
    TimeSpan Interval
    DateTime LastTriggered
    bool IsEnabled
}
```

### 5. Animation System

**Sprite Management**

-   Use sprite sheets for smooth animations
-   Each animation state has multiple frames
-   Implement smooth transitions between states

**Animation States**

-   Idle (sitting, standing variations)
-   Walking (left/right directions)
-   Running (chasing mouse)
-   Sleeping (z's animation)
-   Playing (batting at toys)
-   Happy/Sad expressions

### 6. Special Considerations

**Performance**

-   Use hardware acceleration for rendering
-   Implement efficient collision detection for mouse interaction
-   Throttle animation updates to 30-60 FPS

**User Experience**

-   Include "Do Not Disturb" mode
-   Save pet state between sessions (most likely needs a DB)

**Mouse Chasing Behavior**

-   Calculate distance to cursor
-   Randomly trigger chase mode when cursor is within range
-   Use easing functions for smooth pursuit
-   Add playful "pounce" animation when close

### 7. Development Tools Needed

-   **Visual Studio** for C#/WPF development
-   **Graphics software** for sprite creation (or use free sprite packs)
-   **Git** for version control
-   **WiX Toolset** or similar for creating installer

### 8. File Structure

```
CatDesktopPet/
├── Core/
│   ├── PetController.cs
│   ├── NeedsSystem.cs
│   └── StateManager.cs
├── UI/
│   ├── MainWindow.xaml
│   ├── HousePanel.xaml
│   └── SettingsWindow.xaml
├── Animation/
│   ├── AnimationController.cs
│   └── SpriteManager.cs
├── Data/
│   ├── SaveManager.cs
│   └── ReminderSystem.cs
└── Resources/
    ├── Sprites/
    └── Sounds/
```
